---
sort: 5
---

# Linear algebra applied to Linear Systems

In this module, you will learn how you can apply the concepts learned so far to solve for a
 system of linear equations.

## Today's learning objectives
- [ ] Understand how to solve for a given system of equations using linear algebra.


## Solving Linear Systems of equations

In mathematics, an example of a simple linear equation is


**ax + b = 0**


where
x is unknown, a are termed coefficients of the equation (or slope), and b is termed as a
constant (or an intercept). A simple solution to such an equation is given by


**x = -b / a**


when a is not equal to zero. However, note that there is only one
variable in this equation i.e., x.

A linear system of two or more variables (and hence equations) is termed
as a **system of linear equations** or linear systems.
Please watch the video below to refresh
your knowledge on systems of linear equations.

<!-- blank line -->
<figure class="video_container">
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/75m60SxFfJg?controls=0" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</figure>
<!-- blank line -->

What you observed in the video is solving for a linear system
of equations graphically. However, while this is possible in the case of
two variables, you can imagine that is can become very complex as you increase
the number of variables. Here's where linear algebra comes to the rescue!

We now know enough linear algebra to represent a linear system of equations
in matrix form. For example, a system of equations given below:

**a<sub>1</sub>x<sub>1</sub> + a<sub>2</sub>x<sub>2</sub> = b<sub>1</sub>**
<br>
**a<sub>3</sub>x<sub>1</sub> + a<sub>4</sub>x<sub>2</sub> = b<sub>2</sub>**

can be represented in matrix form as:

**Ax = b**

Where (in numpy notation):

**A** = [[a<sub>1</sub>, a<sub>2</sub>], [a<sub>3</sub>, a<sub>4</sub>]]
<br>
**x** = [[x<sub>1</sub>, x<sub>2</sub>]]
<br>
**b** = [[b<sub>1</sub>, b<sub>2</sub>]]

> Note: what is the matrix(dot) product of **A** and **x**?

Linear algebra provides powerful tools using matrix inversion in order to solve
such systems of linear equations even in very high dimensions.

In general, the solution to the system of equations introduced above is given by:

**x = A<sup>-1</sup>b**

> Note: what does the <sup>-1</sup> symbol represent?

Similar to matrix inversion, solving systems of linear equations is best left
to a computer! In Python, the function **linalg.solve** which is provided by
NumPy is used to solve for a system of linear equations. 

This video will guide you through the steps needed to solve the assignment that follows.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/AqIrdW2-K6k" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>

# Assignment

- [ ] Solve the given system of linear equations using the Python function
  **linalg.solve**.


1. <br>
x<sub>1</sub> + 2x<sub>2</sub> = 1
<br>
3x<sub>1</sub> + 5x<sub>2</sub> = 2


2. <br>
2x<sub>1</sub> + x<sub>2</sub> = 5
<br>
x<sub>1</sub> + x<sub>2</sub> = 2
<br>

3. <br>
4x<sub>1</sub> + 3x<sub>2</sub> = 20
<br>
9x<sub>2</sub> - 5x<sub>1</sub> = 26
<br>
4.<br>
4x<sub>1</sub> + 1x<sub>2</sub> + 2x<sub>3</sub> = 25
<br>
2x<sub>1</sub> - 2x<sub>2</sub> + 3x<sub>3</sub>  = -10
<br>
3x<sub>1</sub> - 5x<sub>2</sub> + 2x<sub>3</sub>  = -4


>  hint: after you have solved for x, verify your solution using np.allclose(np.dot(a, x), b)

- [ ]  Jane runs a cafe in Oslo and sold 20 croissants and 10 cappucinos in one day for a total of
350 euros. The next day she sold 17 croissants and 22 cappucinos for 500 euros. If the prices of a croissant and cappucino remained the same on both the days, what was the price of one croissant and one cappucino?

>  hint: write down the equations before converting them to linear algebra notation.

Now we will start to link the pieces of the (linear algebra) puzzle together, and understand how it related to Machine Learning, and in particular linear models such as linear regression. Please click next to continue.
